Add GenMap to DAML-LF 1.dev spec (#3260)
digital-asset/daml: daml-lf/spec/daml-lf-1.rst

       |  'List'                                    -- BTyList
       |  'Option'                                  -- BTyOption
       |  'Map'                                     -- BTMap
       |  'GenMap'                                  -- BTGenMap
       |  'Update'                                  -- BTyUpdate
       |  'ContractId'                              -- BTyContractId
       |  'Any'                                     -- BTyAny

<<<<<<< HEAD
=======
  Type constraints
    K ::= ε                                         -- ConstraintTrivial
       |  Eq α, K
       |  Serial α, K

> >>>>>>> Add GenMap to DAML-LF 1.dev

Reviewer: small issue with the merge

Author: oops! fixed, thanks

  [*Available in versions >= 1.3*]

Generic Map functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ``GENMAP_EMPTY : ∀ α. ∀ β. 'GenMap' α β``

  Returns the empty generic map.

  [*Available in versions >= 1.dev*]

* ``GENMAP_INSERT : ∀ α. ∀ β.  α → β → 'GenMap' α β → 'GenMap' α β``

  Inserts a new key and value in the map. If the key is already
  present in the map, the associated value is replaced with the

>   supplied value.

Reviewer 2: We should specify how this affects the "order in which keys were inserted" which is relevant for the conversion to lists, do we first-inserted-order or last-inserted-order? If we go with the former, the latter can be _efficiently_ expressed in terms of the former (and `GENMAP_DELETE`). I don't see how this would be possible _efficiently_ the other way around.

Author: I think first inserted order makes more sense. It's certainly what I meant in the spec. It implies that if you insert the same (key, value) pair in a map that is already there, it will not modify the map, i.e. inserts are idempotent. That's nice.

Reviewer 2: I don't know what you mean _exactly_ by "inserts are idempotent". I assume you mean
```
insert k v . insert k v  ==  insert k v
```
for all `k` and `v`. This is true for last-inserted order as well. I think what is more compelling about first-inserted order is that we get
```
insert k (lookup k m) m  ==  m
```
for all `m` and keys `k` of `m`.

We can also define
```
insertLast k v = insertFirst k v . delete k
```
Thus, insert-first order is at least as "powerful" as insert-last order.

Author: Ah, you're right. My sentence was better before the `i.e.`.

  This raises an error if the key is not a valid map key. Keys are
  compared according to the rules listed below.

  [*Available in versions >= 1.dev*]

* ``GENMAP_LOOKUP : ∀ α. ∀ β.  α → 'GenMap' α β → 'Optional' α``

>   Lookups the value at a key in the map.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Looks up the value at a key in the map.
```

  This raises an error if the key is not a valid map key. Keys are
  compared according to the rules listed below.

  [*Available in versions >= 1.dev*]

* ``GENMAP_DELETE : ∀ α. ∀ β.  α → 'GenMap' α β → 'GenMap' α β``

  Deletes a key and its value from the map. When the key is not a
  member of the map, the original map is returned.

  This raises an error if the key is not a valid map key. Keys are
  compared according to the rules listed below.

  [*Available in versions >= 1.dev*]

> * ``GENMAP_LIST : ∀ α. ∀ β.  'GenMap' α β → 'List' ⟨ key: α, value: β ⟩``

Reviewer: @hurryabit Do we want to get ride of tuples ?

Author: If so, we could have separate `GENMAP_KEYS` and `GENMAP_VALUES` . All I did was copy the existing operations from `'Map'`

Reviewer 2: IIRC, we had considered this for `TextMap` already but then decided against having `keys` and `values` separately. Unfortunately, I can't remember why. Doing the zipping in DAML land seems reasonable. If we go with the structural records, we would need to map them into proper DAML pairs anyway. Thus, the performance characteristics don't differ too much. Let's go with `GENMAP_KEYS` and `GENMAP_VALUES`.

Author: :+1:

  Converts to a list of key/value pairs. Unlike ``'MAP_LIST'``, the output
  list is guaranteed to be in the order that the keys were first inserted.

  [*Available in versions >= 1.dev*]

* ``GENMAP_SIZE : ∀ α. ∀ β.  'GenMap' α β → 'Int64'``

  Return the number of elements in the map.

  [*Available in versions >= 1.dev*]

**Validity of Keys:** A key is valid if and only if it is equivalent
to itself according to the relation ``~ᵥ`` defined below. Attempts to
use an invalid key in the operations above always result in a runtime
error.

Of particular note, the following values are never valid keys:

* Lambda expressions ``λ x : τ . e``
* Type abstractions ``Λ α : k . e``
* (Partially applied) built-in functions
* (Un-evaluated) Update/Scenario values
* Any value containing an invalid key

**Comparison of Keys:** We define here the relation ``~ᵥ`` on value
expressions that is used for key comparison. This is a partial
equivalence relation over all values, but a (total) equivalence
relation over valid keys.

> This relation is not exposed as a builtin function, but it coincides

Reviewer 3: Currently you are switching between `builtin` and `built-in`, it would probably be good to stick to one of those.

> with the built-in equality for any given type, if that built-in isdefined. ::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with the built-in equality for any given type, if that built-in is defined. ::
```

                                  ┌──────────┐
  Generic Equivalence Relation    │ e₁ ~ᵥ e₂ │
                                  └──────────┘

  LitInt64₁ and LitInt64₂ have the same value
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqLitInt64
  LitInt64₁ ~ᵥ LitInt64₂

  LitNumeric₁ and LitNumeric₂ have the same scale and value
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqLitNumeric
  LitNumeric₁ ~ᵥ LitNumeric₂

  LitText₁ and LitText₂ have the same value
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqLitText
  LitText₁ ~ᵥ LitText₂

  LitDate₁ and LitDate₂ have the same value
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqLitDate
  LitDate₁ ~ᵥ LitDate₂

  LitTimestamp₁ and LitTimestamp₂ have the same value
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqLitTimestamp
  LitTimestamp₁ ~ᵥ LitTimestamp₂

>   cid₁ and cid₂ are the same

Reviewer 3: Do we want to allow contract ids? The absolute vs relative thing makes that a bit dangerous so at least on the DAML level I probably wouldn’t expose it.

Reviewer 2: Contract IDs are fine here as long as we stick to the following two assumptions:
(1) the rewriting from relative to absolute IDs is injective and no relative ID is ever rewritten to an absolute ID that is in use already,
(2) the rewriting of all contract IDs in a transaction happens in one go without any map operations performed in the middle.
I wonder if we should document these assumptions (in better words than mine)?

Reviewer 3: Oh I see, I think I didn’t realize how the rewriting works until now. Makes sense now but yeah we should definitely document this imho.

  () ~ᵥ ()

  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqTrue
  'True' ~ᵥ 'True'

  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqFalse
  'False' ~ᵥ 'False'

  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqListNil
  'Nil' @τ₁ ~ᵥ 'Nil' @τ₂

  e₁ ~ᵥ e₁'
  e₂ ~ᵥ e₂'
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqListCons
  'Cons' @τ e₁ e₂  ~ᵥ 'Cons' @τ' e₁' e₂'

  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqOptionNone
  'None' @τ₁ ~ᵥ 'None' @τ₂

  e₁ ~ᵥ e₂
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqOptionSome
  'Some' @τ₁ e₁ ~ᵥ 'Some' @τ₂ e₂

  e₁ ~ᵥ e₁'     …       eₙ ~ᵥ eₙ'
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqRecCon
  Mod:T @τ₁ … @τₙ { f₁ = e₁, …, fₙ = eₙ }
    ~ᵥ Mod:T @τ₁' … @τₙ' { f₁ = e₁', …, fₙ = eₙ' }

  e ~ᵥ e'
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqVariantCon
  Mod:T:V @τ₁ … @τₙ e ~ᵥ Mod:T:V @τ₁' … @τₙ' e'

  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqEnumCon
  Mod:T:E ~ᵥ Mod:T:E

  e₁ ~ᵥ e₁'     …       eₙ ~ᵥ eₙ'
  ——————————————————————————————————————————————————— GenEqTupleCon
  ⟨ f₁ = e₁, …, fₘ = eₘ ⟩ ~ᵥ ⟨ f₁ = e₁', …, fₘ = eₘ' ⟩

> 

Reviewer: You are forgetting the "nice" case where keys are maps. 
Of course we can a first implementation without map keys.

Author: That's not nice! We probably will need to add them, but I'm worried the "insertion order" issue will mess people up.

But also I don't see map values under the values section (including `'Map'`). Probably should add them?

Reviewer: We can postpone this problem for later.

Reviewer: TextMap (simply called 'Map' in the spec) are not concern with the insertion order.
They are sorted by key when converted to list or serialized in the ledger.

Author: Right. I propose that two `'Map'` (i.e. TextMap) are considered equal if they have the same key-value pairs, and two `'GenMap'` are considered equal if they have the same key-value pairs *in the same insertion order*, so they result in the same output when using `GENMAP_KEYS` and `GENMAP_VALUES`.

Author: (We could make the insertion order irrelevant for map key comparison, but then two "equal keys" could result in different outputs when passed through `GENMAP_KEYS`. Furthermore, the equality instance `Eq GenMap` that will be defined in DAML, in terms of `GENMAP_KEYS` and `GENMAP_VALUES`, is sensitive to insertion order.)

Author: Following discussion with @bame-da, we decided that equality for GenMaps should not consider insertion order.

Reviewer 2: Are we planning to add a builtin `GENMAP_EQ : forall k v. (v -> v -> Bool) -> GenMap k v -> GenMap k v -> Bool`? (I assume we need to use the builtin equality for keys to make this work. I'm slowly starting to despise user-defined equality...)

Reviewer: We were not planning to add this function as it was not here for `TextMap`. 

But I am planning to add a generic equality `EQUAL: forall v. v -> v -> Bool` using the builin equality. This will obviously work with `GenMap`. Is it not enough ?

Author: @remyhaemmerle-da The issue is that `Eq` (the DAML typeclass) does not necessarily match the built-in equality, so you may get unexpected results when using something like `EQUAL`. In any case we can define `GENMAP_EQ` in Daml without problem, it just won't be fast.

Author: @hurryabit Could we remove user-defined equality from DAML? Should we?

Reviewer: OK. Let's start without it. We can still add it letter.

Reviewer 2: I'm not averse to removing user-defined equality from DAML. Particularly if we find a way to keep the `Eq` type class as a marker but have no (or at least no user-implementable) methods in it. I'm not sure if that feasible though since `Eq` is probably wired quite deep into GHC.
@associahedron do you have some time at hand to investigate this a bit?
@bame-da what do you think about this?

Author: @hurryabit I think we can outlaw custom `Eq` instances in the preprocessor, and tell users to use `deriving Eq` instead.

Author: We could make it a warning for a while, and turn it into an outright error later.
